=head1 NAME

dnuos - Audio file metadata lister

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<dnuos> [options] F<basedir> F<...>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Dnuos is a console program that creates lists of music collections, based on
directory structure.

For example, a list might look like this:

=begin

    Album/Artist                       |  Size | Type | Quality
    ===========================================================
    Ambient                            |       |      | 
        Alva Noto                      |       |      | 
            2001 - Transform           | 70.9M | MP3  | -V2
            2004 - Transrapid          | 30.2M | MP3  | -aps
            2005 - Transspray          | 31.7M | MP3  | -aps
            2005 - Transvision         | 32.3M | MP3  | -aps
        Alva Noto and Ryuichi Sakamoto |       |      | 
            2002 - Vrioon              | 72.6M | MP3  | -aps
            2005 - Insen               | 99.1M | MP3  | 320 C
            2006 - Revep               | 27.9M | MP3  | -V2n

=end

The list format is completely customizable and can be plain text or HTML.

Dnuos supports MP3, AAC, Musepack, Ogg Vorbis, and FLAC audio files. Quality
profile detection is also supported, including LAME quality preset
information (see L<http://wiki.hydrogenaudio.org/index.php?title=Lame#Recommended_encoder_settings>).

Audio file information is saved to disk after a list is made for the first
time, making subsequent lists much faster to generate. Only audio files and
directories that have been changed since the last list was made are analyzed.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item F<basedir> F<...>

Base directories to search for audio files in.

=item B<-h>

Show the help message and exit.

=item B<--help-output-string>

Show the output string help message.

=back

=head2 APPLICATION

=over

=item B<--debug>

Output debug trace to F<stderr>.

=item B<--ignore-bad>

Don't list files that cause Audiotype failure.

=item B<-q>, B<--quiet>

Omit progress indication.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Display version.

=back

=head2 CACHING

=over

=item B<--cache-dir>=F<DIR>

Store cache in F<DIR> (default F<~/.dnuos>).

=item B<--cull-cache>

Cull non-existent cached direcotires and exit.

=item B<--delete-cache>

Delete the cache directory and exit.

=item B<--disable-cache>

Disable caching.

=back

=head2 DIRECTORY WALKING

=over

=item B<-e> F<DIR> B<--exclude>=F<DIR>

Exclude F<DIR> from search.

=item B<-i>, B<--ignore-case>

Case-insensitive directory sorting.

=item B<-L>, B<--list-files>

List audio files in directories (doesn't use caching).

=item B<-m>, B<--merge>

Parse F<basedirs> in parallel and merge output.

=item B<-u> I<TYPES>, B<--unknown-types>=I<TYPES>

A comma-separated list of unknown audio types to list.

=item B<-w>, B<--wildcards>

Expand wildcards in F<basedirs>.

=back

=head2 FILTERING

=over

=item B<-b> I<MIN>, B<--bitrate>=I<MIN>

Exclude MP3s with bitrate lower than I<MIN> (in Kbps).

=item B<-l>, B<--lame-only>

Exclude MP3s with no LAME profile.

=item B<-v>, B<--vbr-only>

Exclude MP3s with constant bitrates.

=item B<-M>, B<--no-mixed>

Exclude directories with mixed files.

=back

=head2 OUTPUT

=over

=item B<-B> I<COLOR>, B<--bg>=I<COLOR>

Set HTML background I<COLOR> (default I<white>).

=item B<-f> F<FILE>, B<--file>=F<FILE>

Write output to F<FILE>.

=item B<-H>, B<--html>

HTML output (deprecated, use B<--template> I<html>).

=item B<-I> I<n>, B<--indent> I<n>

Set indent to I<n> (default I<4>).

=item B<-o> I<STRING>, B<--output>=I<STRING>

Set output format I<STRING> used in plain-text and HTML output. See
L</"OUTPUT STRING FORMAT"> for details on syntax. (default
I<[n,-52]| [s,5] | [t,-4] | [q]>).

=item B<-O> F<FILE>, B<--output-db>=F<FILE>

Write list in output.db format to F<FILE> (deprecated, use B<--template>
I<db>).

=item B<-P> I<n>, B<--prefer-tag>=I<n>

If both ID3v1 and ID3v2 tags exist, prefer I<n> (1 or 2) (default I<2>).

=item B<-s>, B<--strip>

Strip output of field headers and empty directories.

=item B<--template>=I<TEMPLATE>

Set output I<TEMPLATE> (default I<plaintext>).

=item B<-T> I<COLOR>, B<--text> I<COLOR>

Set HTML text I<COLOR> (default I<black>).

=back

=head2 STATISTICS

=over

=item B<-D>, B<--date>

Display datestamp header.

=item B<-S>, B<--stats>

Display statistics results.

=item B<-t>, B<--time>

Display elapsed time footer.

=back

=head2 OUTPUT STRING FORMAT

Anything enclosed by brackets is considered a field. A field must have the
following syntax:

=over

=item C<[TAG]>

=item C<[TAG,WIDTH]>

=item C<[TAG,WIDTH,SUFFIX]>

=item C<[TAG,,SUFFIX]>

=back

C<TAG> is any of the following characters:

=over

=item C<a>

List of bitrates in Audiolist compatible format.

=item C<A>

Artist name as found in ID3 tags.

=item C<b>

Bitrate with suffix (e.g. 192k).

=item C<B>

Bitrate in bps.

=item C<C>

Album name as found in ID3 tags.

=item C<f>

Number of audio files (including spacers).

=item C<l>

Length in minutes and seconds.

=item C<L>

Length in seconds.

=item C<m>

Time of last change.

=item C<M>

Time of last change in seconds since the epoch.

=item C<n>

Directory name (indented).

=item C<N>

Directory name.

=item C<p>

Profile.

=item C<P>

Full path.

=item C<q>

Quality.

=item C<s>

Size with suffix (e.g. 65.4M).

=item C<S>

Size in bytes.

=item C<t>

File type.

=item C<T>

=item Bitrate type

=over 

=item C<~>

Mixed files.

=item C<C>

Constant bitrate.

=item C<L>

Lossless compression.

=item C<V>

Variable bitrate.

=back

=item C<V>

Encoder.

=back

C<WIDTH> defines the exact width of the field. The output is cropped to this
width if needed. Negative values will give left aligned output. Cropping is
always done on the right.

C<SUFFIX> lets you specify a unit to be concatenated to all non-empty data.

Other interpreted sequences are:

=over

=item C<\[>

[

=item C<\]>

]

=item C<\n>

New line.

=item C<\t>

Tab character.

=back

Unescaped brackets are forbidden unless they define a field.

Note: If you have any whitespace in your output string you must put it inside
quotes or otherwise it will not get parsed right.

=head1 AUTHORS

Dnuos is developed and maintained by aiiie and Mattias
PE<auml>ivE<auml>rinta.

Oidua was originally developed by Sylvester Johansson and Mattias
PE<auml>ivE<auml>rinta.

=head1 HISTORY

Dnuos is based on code from Oidua (see L<http://oidua.suxbad.com/>). Oidua
makes similar lists, but is much older, has fewer features, and is no longer
maintained.
